JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
(GUNFIRE)
MAN: The first shot, I
didn't realize was a gunshot.
I just heard a loud pop.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What
we're learning about a
gunman who opened fire
on members of Congress
during an early morning baseball
practice, shooting the third
highest ranking Republican
in the House of
Representatives, Steve
Scalise, and several others.
Then: A massive fire at a
London apartment tower leaves at
least a dozen dead, as rescuers
search for people trapped
inside the 24-story tower.
And is there such a
thing as clean coal?
A look at the nation's
largest carbon-capturing
plant, part of a plan to
clean up the environment
while keeping the
coal industry alive.
DAVID GREESON, Vice President
of Development, NRG: We're just
now reaching the point where
this technology is mature enough
to be considered for rollout
to the broad coal-fired fleet
in the United States
and around the world.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: A
leading Republican in
the U.S. House lies
critically wounded tonight.
The Illinois man who shot him,
along with a police officer,
a congressional staffer,
and a lobbyist, has died.
They came together in a
fusillade of bullets and
bloodshed early today,
just outside Washington.
Our Lisa Desjardins
begins our coverage.
(GUNFIRE)
LISA DESJARDINS: For at least
five minutes, gunshots crackled
across the Northern Virginia
baseball field where
Republican members of
Congress were practicing.
Cell phone video shared with the
"NewsHour" captured a harrowing
scene of a gunfight between
the attacker and Capitol Police.
MAN: Hey.
Is that guy OK out there?
Has that guy been shot?
Is he OK?
Is anybody talking to him?
LISA DESJARDINS: The man who
shot the video, Noah Nathan,
had been out walking his dogs.
NOAH NATHAN, Eyewitness: I saw
the congressional players, and,
you know, they're a regular
here practicing in the morning.
And then I heard -- I
thought it was fireworks.
And then I heard another
one and realized, OK,
maybe that's not fireworks.
It's gunfire.
And then people started
scattering, and then
there was more shots
and you could hear them
skimming off the gravel
and hitting the fence.
And it was a helpless feeling.
I couldn't do anything.
LISA DESJARDINS: As lawmakers
jumped over fences, seeking
cover, House Majority Whip
Steve Scalise was
shot in the hip.
Alabama Congressman
Mo Brooks saw it all.
REP.
MO BROOKS (R), Alabama: It's
the feeling of helplessness,
when you have got a baseball
bat and a guy's got a rifle.
And you see your friends,
Steve Scalise in particular,
lying on the ground, dragging
himself from the infield dirt
to the outfield grass, and
there was nothing we could do to
help him.
LISA DESJARDINS: Georgia
Congressman Barry Loudermilk
says it wasn't a random attack.
REP.
BARRY LOUDERMILK (R), Georgia:
There were civilians out there.
There were people walking their
dogs, laying on the ground
screaming and crying, but he
wasn't targeting them.
He was shooting at us.
LISA DESJARDINS: Joe Barton
of Texas had taken his
young sons to the practice.
REP.
JOE BARTON (R), Texas: We got
some of us were in the dugout,
some of us were on the ground.
I was behind the dugout.
My son Jack got under an SUV.
And he was very brave.
My other son Brad was
in the batting cage and
he also was very brave.
LISA DESJARDINS: In the video,
you can hear people shouting
for police to shoot the gunman.
MAN: Shoot him!
LISA DESJARDINS:
Again, Mo Brooks:
REP.
MO BROOKS: The bravery that
they displayed, taking on a
guy with the rifle while they
have pistols, shooting from
long distance, and if they
had not been successful, then
the tragedy here would have
undoubtedly been much greater,
because those of us who were
in the first base dugout,
we'd of had no chance.
LISA DESJARDINS:
First-responders were on
the scene in minutes.
Some victims were airlifted
to hospitals by helicopter.
Scalise underwent surgery and
was in critical condition.
The suspected shooter was
also taken to the hospital,
where he died of his wounds.
Police identified him as
66-year-old James Hodgkinson
of Belleville, Illinois.
TIMOTHY SLATER, FBI: Law
enforcement has reason to
believe that the shooter
has been in Alexandria,
Virginia, area since
March of this year.
The FBI has issued again
a seeking information
poster that is located
on our Web site asking
the public to come forward with
information on the shooter.
LISA DESJARDINS: Florida
Congressman Ron DeSantis
believes he talked with
Hodgkinson just before
the shooting.
REP.
RON DESANTIS (R), Florida: An
unidentified individual walked
up to the car, asked Congressman
Duncan, who was in the front
passenger seat, whether they
were Republicans or Democrats
in the field.
It was a little bit abrasive.
It was something that kind of
struck me as odd, not odd to
the extent I thought he was
going to go shoot people.
LISA DESJARDINS: Already,
a picture has begun to
emerge of Hodgkinson.
A Facebook page of the same
name is filled with anti-Trump
posts, and Hodgkinson apparently
volunteered for Bernie
Sanders' presidential campaign.
The Vermont senator today
condemned the shooting
on the Senate floor.
SEN.
BERNIE SANDERS (I),
Vermont: I am sickened
by this despicable act.
And let me be as
clear as I can be.
Violence of any kind is
unacceptable in our society.
And I condemn this action in
the strongest possible terms.
LISA DESJARDINS: There is a
contrast between the location
of this shooting, a neighborhood
that is known for putting up
signs of welcome and opposing
hate, and this act of violence
that some say may symbolize
rising anger in America.
At the scene, Virginia Governor
Terry McAuliffe specifically
pointed to politics.
GOV.
TERRY MCAULIFFE (D), Virginia:
What you saw in the last
presidential campaign, there's
just a lot of dug-in hard
feelings out there that
exist in this country today.
I do think our country
has become way too divided
between red and blue.
LISA DESJARDINS: President
Trump echoed the cry for unity
at the White House hours after
the shooting.
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States: We may have our
differences, but we do well
in times like these to remember
that everyone who serves in
our nation's capital is here
because, above all,
they love our country.
LISA DESJARDINS: The House
canceled votes for the day,
but shaken lawmakers, Democrats
and Republicans alike,
gathered on the House floor
in a show of solidarity.
REP.
PAUL RYAN (R-WI), Speaker
of the House: We are united.
We are united in our shock,
we are united in our anguish.
An attack on one of us is
an attack on all of us.
(APPLAUSE)
REP.
NANCY PELOSI (D-CA),
House Minority Leader:
We cannot let that be a
victory for the assailant
or anyone who would
think that way.
So, tomorrow, we will
go out on the field.
We will root for our team.
We want everyone to do
his or her very best.
And we will use this occasion
as one that brings us together
and not separates us further.
LISA DESJARDINS: An
update on conditions.
Congressman Scalise and one
other staffer who was shot
are in critical condition.
The others injured
today, we're told, are in
good or fair condition.
And, also, about that baseball
game, it is scheduled to be,
as planned, tomorrow night.
They are not canceling.
And Judy, they're adding
another charity cause,
the Fallen Officers Fund.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Lisa, are
there changes in security as
a result of what happened?
LISA DESJARDINS: I
think the answer to
that, Judy, is not yet.
Here, of course, the Capitol
is a highly secure building.
There's no changes here.
No one said there
need to be changes.
But there is a real
question about these
events where many members
of Congress gather in one
place.
Congressman Scalise's security
detail was there today, as
well as one other Capitol
police officer because so
many congressmen were present.
They're wondering if there
need to be more of a police
presence when there are not just
leaders, but any members
of Congress gathered
in one place like that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Lisa,
you're at that Capitol Building
every day, practically.
How are people
dealing with this?
LISA DESJARDINS: I think the
mood today, Judy, is sober.
It's not highly emotional, but
it's one where they are taking
very serious stock of where
we are as a nation and where
people are in terms of how
they look at their leaders and
how they look at violence.
I think there's also a lot of
questions today about whether
political rhetoric has, indeed,
gone too far, and whether the
divides that affect the votes
on the House and Senate floor
are reverberating back and
forth with public divides now
rising into anger and violence.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Lisa
Desjardins, who covers the
Capitol every day for us.
Lisa, you have been on this
story all day from the moment
you heard about it this morning.
Thank you very much.
LISA DESJARDINS: My pleasure.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we are now
joined by the managers of the
two congressional baseball
teams that were practicing this
morning in different places.
They are Republican
Representative Joe Barton
of Texas, who, as you
just saw, was at this
morning's Republican baseball
practice, and Democratic
Representative Michael Doyle of
Pennsylvania.
Gentlemen, welcome
to the program.
Congressman Barton,
to you first.
First of all, we're so glad
that you are all right.
We saw that you were
there with your two sons.
How are you doing?
REP.
JOE BARTON: We're doing fine.
Everybody was looking
out for my two sons.
And thank gosh -- God that the
Capitol Police were there and
immediately returning fire,
which diverted the gunman
from attacking the members
who were on the field.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Did you
feel there was anything
more that could have
been done this morning?
REP.
JOE BARTON: Not really.
I mean, we practice
in a public park.
There's a dog park.
There's a YMCA by
the baseball field.
There are joggers.
There are -- it's just, you
know, most mornings, there are
people out doing their exercise
and walking their dogs.
We don't make any attempt
to restrict people from
watching the practice.
This individual who did the
shooting, some of the members
think they saw him yesterday,
and, while I thought he had
just driven in, apparently, he
had been in the area for some
time.
So, I don't -- I don't
know how you can function
in an open democracy,
especially in the House
of Representatives,
with 435 members, and
not have public access.
And, again, this game has been
played for about over 100 years.
There's never been
anything like this before.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Congressman
Doyle, where were you
when you heard this?
And what did you think?
REP.
MIKE DOYLE (D), Pennsylvania:
So, we were in the
middle of our practice.
We were having batting practice,
and I was standing behind home
plate, you know, instructing
our batters.
And I got a text message
from one of my staff
saying, are you OK?
And I was puzzled by
the -- by the text.
And then I saw right below it
a news clip saying, shooter
at congressional baseball
practice, and realized at that
moment that it had to be over
at the Republican practice.
So I called my team off the
field, because we didn't have
much information at the time,
to get them over in the dugout,
and let them all know what
happened and what I was hearing.
And there was sort of a --
I call it a stunned silence
with most of the players.
We just couldn't
believe something like
this was happening.
And there wasn't much we
could do where we were.
So we basically just huddled up
and started saying some prayers
for our Republican colleagues
that they'd be safe and that
nobody would be hurt badly.
And, after that, you know, the
reports started to flood into
our phones and we just, you
know, were reading them
like everyone else.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Congressman
Barton, and, again, we know that
you both were practicing for
this congressional game, annual
congressional game that's
taking place tomorrow night.
You're going ahead with it.
Is the -- I just asked Lisa
Desjardins this question, our
reporter at the Capitol, and
she said this is -- the reaction
there has been sober, that
people are -- to some extent,
members may be rethinking
whether things have
gotten too partisan.
What do you think?
REP.
JOE BARTON: Well, the reaction
here has been very supportive
of the Republicans on the
team.
Congressman Doyle and his
Democratic players have
reached out to us personally.
The speaker and Mrs.
Pelosi, the minority leader,
have talked directly.
Everybody is supportive because,
we are -- we have an R or an
D by our name, but our title
- - our title is United
States representative.
And I'm very proud to be
a member of the Congress.
And I'm proud to serve with
people like Mike Doyle.
So, you know, we feel very
blessed that we're here
to have this interview.
Had the shooter not been
attacked by the Capitol
Hill Police, who risked
their lives -- and
two of them got shot -- had he
gotten inside the fence of the
field and gotten to the first
base dugout, there were 20,
15 members, and five or six
staffers in that dugout huddled
down.
It's actually a lowered,
below-the-field dugout.
And there would have been
no place for them to run.
So, it could have
been much worse.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Congressman
Doyle, I can see the pain
in both of your faces.
Is this a time for coming
together in some way and for
rethinking, as we said, some of
the partisanship?
REP.
MIKE DOYLE: I think all of us
are reflecting on that today.
Joe and I have been associated
with this game for quite a
while, and we have been friends
for a long time.
His son Jack is like one of
my nephews, always comes up
and asks me how I'm doing.
And I always tries to get
intelligence from Jack on what
his dad is up to, and Jack never
gives him up.
So he's a good kid that way.
(LAUGHTER)
REP.
MIKE DOYLE: But I got to tell
you, there was a real feeling
of helplessness on our part
as we stood there in the
dugout reading the reports
that were coming in.
We know -- we know
all these guys.
They're our friends.
We may have differences
politically, but they're
our friends, and we care
about them very much.
And I think all of us are
reflecting on how each one of us
individually can set an example
for the country, too, because
when people see their leaders
being uncivil towards one
another, then you start to
see the public being uncivil
towards one another and towards
their leaders.
And I think that's
got to change.
So maybe it starts with
us, and maybe this will
change some attitudes here.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Congressman
Barton, I hear and I see the
affection between the two of
you, and I am seeing and hearing
you say it exists with others.
But I think it's fair to
say, it doesn't always come
across in the news coverage.
REP.
JOE BARTON: Well, politics in
Washington is a contact sport.
But it shouldn't be a
personal animosity sport.
And with Mike and I and a lot
of other members, it's not.
I do want to apologize for
getting emotional a minute ago.
You know, Tom Hanks was the
manager of a women's baseball
team, and, in that movie, he has
the famous line, there's
no crying in baseball.
Well, there's certainly no
-- shouldn't be any crying
in congressional baseball.
And I do apologize for my
emotional outburst a minute ago.
JUDY WOODRUFF: No -- no...
(CROSSTALK)
REP.
MIKE DOYLE: I would say
there's lots of members of
Congress that get along.
We tend to not be
the ones the media is
interested in interviewing.
Oftentimes, the media's
interested in interviewing
the two that are throwing
the swords at each
other.
So, maybe the news media,
too, can reflect a little bit
on that and show some of the
positive things that
take place down here.
REP.
JOE BARTON: That's true.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And that's
something for us to reflect on.
Well, we so appreciate the two
of you being together right now.
And no apology needed,
Congressman Barton.
It's entirely understandable
why you would be emotional
at a time like this.
We thank you.
We're thankful that
you are all right.
We thank you for
talking with us.
Congressman Doyle, thank you.
We thank you both.
REP.
MIKE DOYLE: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And now to
the day's other major story.
It is in London, where a
fast-moving fire engulfed a
high-rise apartment building.
It killed at least 12
people and injured scores.
We have a report from Dan
Rivers of Independent Television
News, and with a warning: Some
of the images and sounds
may be disturbing.
DAN RIVERS: With horrifying
ferocity, the fire consumed
Grenfell Tower in minutes, a
24-floor inferno from which
there was no escape for some.
Trapped by smoke and flames,
residents signaled their plight
from on high as the building
disintegrated around them.
On this mobile phone footage,
the cries for help are chilling.
MAN: Help!
Help!
MAN: We saw people looking out
of the windows, screaming help,
screaming, help, help, flashing
their lights and everything.
And now all those windows,
people are gone, literally gone.
MAN: I saw one person
trying to jump out.
One actually jumped out,
and obviously what happened.
It's just a nightmare.
DAN RIVERS: The streets around
Grenfell Tower were soon full
of those who escaped its flames,
children among those suffering
from the acrid fumes.
An exhausted little girl
is cradled as the shock
and bewilderment sink in.
Many here have lost everything.
Some are still unsure what's
happened to neighbors,
friends, loved ones.
And, above them,
the fire raged on.
As the sky lightened,
the flames continued
to devour the building.
This was the view from the
SOUTH BANK, the plume of
smoke visible for 20 miles.
With daylight, stories
of extraordinary escape
started to emerge.
SAMIRA LAMRANI, Witness: A
lady appeared at the window,
gesturing, body language, from
what she was saying, I'm
about to throw my baby,
please catch the baby.
And the baby, I think,
was wrapped in some sort
of bed sheet, blanket.
And she threw the baby.
As the baby came down -- and
this was about approximately
from the ninth or 10th floor
- - a member of the public,
a gentleman ran forward and
miraculously grabbed the baby.
And, like I said, above you,
from the left, from the right,
mostly kids, it was harrowing,
torturing screams
for help, young kids.
And I think also, where
the fire was now spread,
people were reaching out
from the front window,
trying to grasp a bit of
fresh air, trying to breathe
in like they were struggling.
And there were, at one point,
one window about four or five
heads all squeezing their heads
through.
It was honestly
like a horror movie.
DAN RIVERS: Some had
knotted sheets together
in an attempt to escape.
But even this left them
several floors short of safety.
WOMAN: People were
jumping off buildings.
People were screaming, saying,
help me, help me, help me.
DAN RIVERS: The cause
of the fire is unknown,
but one resident claims
it spread from her
neighbor's flat, possibly
a faulty appliance.
WOMAN: The fire started from
the kitchen, but I don't know
exactly -- from which problem,
I don't know.
But it was from the kitchen,
because the flat door was open.
DAN RIVERS: It's already
clear the death toll
will be significant.
Up to 600 people lived in
Grenfell House in 120 flats.
For those who were on the
very upper floors, the
odds of survival seem slim.
Those fighting the fire
confirmed today how challenging
it's been to extinguish.
MAN: This was an unprecedented
fire in terms of scale,
speed, and spread.
And just to reiterate that
point, the incident continues
to be a challenging incident for
us.
DAN RIVERS: There is speculation
a gap behind a recently added
external cladding may have
created a chimney effect,
allowing the flames to spread.
Some had to wait all
night before they escaped.
This man was still
calling for help six hours
after the fire started.
At times, he disappeared
into clouds of smoke,
but, incredibly, he did
finally make it out,
one of 65 rescued from
Grenfell Tower today.
Tonight, while most of the
flames have been put out, the
charred shell of the tower block
continues to smolder.
It may be days before the
final death toll is known, and
much longer before the cause
of this tragedy is pinpointed.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Prime Minister
Theresa May promised a full
investigation, and the British
government ordered safety
checks at other high-rises
undergoing renovations.
In the day's other news:
Leaders of the Senate
Intelligence Committee
held their first meeting
with Robert Mueller, the special
counsel investigating Russian
meddling in the 2016 election.
That followed 24 hours
of speculation about
Mueller's future.
Last night, White
House spokeswoman Sarah
Huckabee Sanders told
reporters: "While the
president has the right
to fire Mueller, he has
no intention of doing so."
The New York Times reported that
Mr. Trump began contemplating
his dismissal shortly
after he was appointed.
The U.S. Senate overwhelmingly
approved new sanctions on
Russia today over its election
hacking.
The penalties target those
involving human rights
abuses and cyber-crime.
The bill also blocks the
president from removing
sanctions without
congressional approval.
Ahead of the vote, Secretary
of State Rex Tillerson warned
a House panel against limiting
the president's options.
REX TILLERSON, U.S. Secretary
of State: I would urge Congress
to ensure any legislation
allows the president to have the
flexibility to adjust sanctions
to meet the needs of what
is always an evolving
diplomatic situation.
Essentially, we would ask for
the flexibility to turn the heat
up when we need to, but also
to ensure that we have
the ability to maintain
a constructive dialogue.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The amendment
is part of a broader bill
dealing with sanctions on Iran.
If it clears the Senate,
the measure still
needs House approval.
President Trump has now handed
off authority over troop levels
in Afghanistan to Secretary
of Defense James Mattis.
Mattis confirmed it today,
but said it doesn't mean
an immediate increase
in U.S. deployments.
Meanwhile, the U.N.
secretary-general, Antonio
Guterres, visited Kabul today.
He said there was -- quote
-- "no military solution" for
that country's long-running
war.
Back in this country, a
gunman in San Francisco
shot three people to
death at a UPS warehouse,
before turning the
gun on himself.
Police say the man was
a UPS employee armed
with an assault pistol.
Heavily armed officers searched
the sprawling complex after
the shooting started, as dozens
of employees poured
out of the building.
Five people were charged
with involuntary manslaughter
today in connection with the
lead-contaminated water
crisis in Flint, Michigan.
The case involves the
death of an elderly
man from Legionnaires'
disease allegedly brought
on by the tainted water.
Those charged today include Nick
Lyon, a Michigan state health
and human services director.
He could get up to 15 years
in prison if he's convicted.
The Federal Reserve Board has
raised a key short-term interest
rate again, meaning that
rates for credit cards and
similar debt are going up.
The quarter-point hike is
the third in six months.
In Washington today, Fed
Chair Janet Yellen suggested
it's a vote of confidence.
JANET YELLEN, Federal Reserve
Chair: The economy is doing
well, is showing resilience.
We have a very strong labor
market, an unemployment
rate that's declined
to levels we have not
seen since 2001.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The Fed
also announced plans to
gradually start scaling
back its bond holdings.
That could cause long-term
interest rates to rise.
Nearly 200 Democratic lawmakers
are suing President Trump
over foreign money ties to
his business empire.
They say that he never divested
from his far-flung interests, so
he is violating, they say, the
Constitution's
Emoluments Clause.
It restricts gifts and
benefits from foreign leaders.
The attorneys general from
Maryland and the District of
Columbia filed a similar suit
this week.
On Wall Street today, the Dow
Jones industrial average gained
46 points to close at 21374.
The Nasdaq fell 25 points,
and the S&P 500 slipped two.
And a French pilot successfully
crossed the English Channel
in a flying car today.
The machine was part dune
buggy and part paraglider.
It took off from an abandoned
runway near Calais, France,
and took just under an hour
to make the crossing.
The pilot and car landed
safely near Dover, a
journey of about 36 miles.
Now you have seen it.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
how the defense secretary's new
authority could change troop
levels in Afghanistan; the
latest technology that aims to
capture carbon emissions from
coal; we will hear from
the nation's newest poet
laureate; and much more.
The Trump administration, as
you heard, is taking steps to
increasing America's military
presence in Afghanistan,
after years of reducing
U.S. forces there.
William Brangham has the story.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Since taking
office, the Trump administration
has been conducting a
review of America's
16-year war in Afghanistan.
The current U.S. commander
there, General John Nicholson,
has recommended sending 3,000
to 5,000 more troops to augment
the 10,000 Americans and
3,000 allied forces that are
already in the country.
Today, Defense Secretary
James Mattis announced
that the president had now
given him the authority
to decide appropriate
troop levels.
For more on all of this, we
turn to retired Lieutenant
General Douglas Lute.
He served on the National
Security Council staffs in both
the George W. Bush and Barack
Obama administrations, where
he focused on Afghanistan,
Iraq, and South Asia.
For the past four years, he
served as U.S. ambassador to
NATO, and he's now a senior
fellow at Harvard University.
Welcome to the "NewsHour."
LT.
GEN.
DOUGLAS LUTE (RET.),
Former U.S. Ambassador
to NATO: Good to be here.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So, let's talk
first off about this decision
by the president to hand
General -- or Secretary
of Defense James Mattis
the decision-making
for troop levels.
How unusual is that?
LT.
GEN.
DOUGLAS LUTE: Well, it is
unusual, but I think we should
first appreciate that we should
have confidence in the entire
Pentagon chain of command,
starting with Secretary Mattis,
but all the way down through
Central Command, and then
ultimately to General Nicholson,
Mick Nicholson, who you
mentioned, who is our
commander, four-star
commander in Afghanistan.
So, this is a very experienced
team, responsible individuals.
They're going to take this,
this new authority seriously.
I also think there is a logic.
There is a rationale to
providing the Pentagon
some flexibility.
It gives them more agility to
fit the number of troops to
the task in Afghanistan, and
that all makes sense.
It does, however, raise one
concern, and that's the concern
that strategy is made up of a
lot more than just
the Pentagon piece.
And so I would be concerned,
or I would be interested in
hearing how the administration
intends to make sure that the
other pieces, the political side
of the equation, the diplomatic
equation, the economic
assistance equation,
the intelligence
community's role, how all
these various pieces are fit
together in a coherent hole.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Well, you
raise a very good question,
because, traditionally, we think
of a strategy being set from
the top, from the president,
with advice from all of the
relevant agencies below.
What do you think this does
to the decision-making process
for a country like Afghanistan?
LT.
GEN.
DOUGLAS LUTE: Well, I think
it's too soon to tell.
The traditional role is that
the National Security Council
would have this oversight
role, this coordinating role,
to make sure that the strategy
stays aligned over time
and that all the pieces
relate to one another
in a coherent way.
It's not clear whether this
move to give additional
authorities, additional
autonomy to the Pentagon
is just the opening step, or
whether there will still be a
role for the NSC, the National
Security Council, led
by H.R. McMaster, to
oversee the whole process.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So, we have
said Mattis and Nicholson
both believe that more U.S.
troops to Afghanistan
is a good idea.
Do you share that belief?
LT.
GEN.
DOUGLAS LUTE: Well, I think a
few more -- a few thousand or
even 10,000 more U.S. troops...
WILLIAM BRANGHAM:
Ten thousand more?
LT.
GEN.
DOUGLAS LUTE: I'm saying that
I think that, hypothetically,
an increase on that scale,
let's say, for example, a
doubling of U.S. troops -- there
are some 8,500 there now -- can
help sustain the current
security stalemate.
But I don't believe that
troops alone will actually
be decisive in the end.
Troops alone can't win this war.
Troops alone will not
remove the stalemate.
The stalemate fundamentally
rests on the political
side of the equation.
So, alongside any
military surge, any --
the addition of any number
of U.S. troops, I will
be very interested to hear the
administration's ambitions in
terms of how they're going to
deal with the politics.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Well, explain
what the challenges are there
for the politics in Afghanistan.
LT.
GEN.
DOUGLAS LUTE: Well, I look
at this as a three-part
equation on the political side.
So, first of all, inside the
Afghan government itself, here
you have zero-sum politics among
the different national players.
You have a high
level of corruption.
You have the patronage network.
You have a long period
of time where you have
actually had stalemate
from the central government
itself.
Second, you have stalemate
between Afghanistan
and its neighboring
states, most prominently
Pakistan, but not just Pakistan.
We only have to look at the map
and see the geographic equation
here, which includes Iran
to the west, Central Asia,
and Russia to the north, and
beyond, to the northeast China,
and further to the east, India.
So this is a very complex
regional diplomatic equation.
All those players I have just
mention have some impact on
what happens inside Afghanistan.
And then, ultimately,
to bring this war to a
conclusion, a political
end, which the military
equation should be in support
of, it involves politics between
the Afghan government and
the Taliban, the opponent.
And so on all three of
these fronts, inside
Kabul, in the region, and
between the government
and the insurgents, there's a
real need for a political surge.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Among those
neighbors, Pakistan obviously
looms very large in Afghanistan,
and provide a consistent safe
haven for the Taliban that are
waging this massive insurgency
in the country.
How can the U.S. get Pakistan
to help us in that fight?
LT.
GEN.
DOUGLAS LUTE: Well, first of
all, I think you have to place
our requirements, our demands
on Pakistan in this part of
the arena, that is, their
support for the Taliban, in the
context of our other
interests in Pakistan.
And we actually have several
interests in Pakistan which
I think surpass our interest
in dealing with
the Afghan Taliban.
I would label Pakistan's
internal stability itself.
Here you have more than
180 million Pakistanis
in a country where you
have not just the Afghan
Taliban, but the Pakistani
Taliban, remnants of al-Qaida,
and other regional terrorist
groups, all of which threaten
the stability of the state.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: A
nuclear-powered state.
LT.
GEN.
DOUGLAS LUTE: And a state
which has the fastest
growing, the fastest
expanding nuclear arsenal
in the world.
So, that very dangerous cocktail
of terrorists, extremists, and
nuclear weapons is actually
probably more of a
vital national interest
to us than Pakistan's
support for the Afghan
Taliban.
So, there's a large array
of complex interests
here which are at play.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Even if the
administration articulates a
strategy, do you think that
this administration can
execute that strategy?
LT.
GEN.
DOUGLAS LUTE: Well, I
think, right now, they're
working with a handicap.
And that is, while the National
Security Council itself, those
who set strategy and overwatch
the strategy, is largely
in place, the implementers
of the strategy are
largely not in place,
because they have a
large number of vacancies
among those officials who
are yet to be nominated
and confirmed by the
Senate, especially in
the Defense Department
and the State Department.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Former
Ambassador Douglas Lute,
thank you very much.
LT.
GEN.
DOUGLAS LUTE: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The future
of coal is very much at the
center of debate right now when
it comes to the politics
and business of energy.
Whatever you may think about
those questions, the U.S.
still uses a lot of coal.
About 30 percent of our
energy, of our electricity
is generated by it.
For some, the Holy Grail is
new technology that captures
some of coal's worst problems
with greenhouse gases.
Miles O'Brien reports
on the largest facility
trying to do so.
It's part of our weekly
series on the Leading Edge
of science and technology.
MILES O'BRIEN: At the
W.A. Parish power plant
southwest of Houston,
they are piling up coal,
getting ready for another
long, hot, aggressively
air-conditioned summer.
One of the largest fossil fuel
power plants in the country,
Parish can generate about
one-fifth of the city's
electricity using coal-
and gas-fired turbines.
And it is leading the
nation down a promising,
yet problematic path.
Here, they are trying
to make clean coal more
than a political slogan.
Mauricio Gutierrez is CEO
of NRG, owner of the plant.
MAURICIO GUTIERREZ, President
and CEO, NRG: We built the
world's largest carbon capture
system on an existing
coal-fired power plant.
It is the first commercial
scale facility of this
kind in the United States.
MILES O'BRIEN: They are
capturing and storing
carbon dioxide, the
greenhouse gas that is
the main driver
of global warming.
This is prompting some
unexpected support from members
of the Trump administration.
Listen to Energy Secretary
Rick Perry at the ceremonial
opening in April.
RICK PERRY, U.S. Secretary of
Energy: I think the solutions
to many of the challenges that
we have in the world today
are displayed behind me.
MILES O'BRIEN: The same Rick
Perry who wrote a book calling
climate scientists members
of a secular carbon cult who
manipulate data and climate
science a contrived, phony mess,
but not here.
RICK PERRY: It shows we don't
have to pit the environment
on one side weighing and the
economy on the other side.
We can and we will be
good stewards of both.
MILES O'BRIEN: The steward of
this project for NRG is David
Greeson, the vice president
of development.
DAVID GREESON, Vice President
of Development, NRG: We're
interested in doing more carbon
capture as a part of our overall
sustainable energy future
plan, and so we're going to
see how this one works.
MILES O'BRIEN: They call the
billion-dollar carbon capture
and storage system Petra Nova.
NRG built it in partnership
with the Japanese oil company
JX Nippon using a $190 million
grant from the Department
of Energy doled out during
the Obama administration.
DAVID GREESON: So we're
capturing about 200
tons of CO2 per hour.
On an annual basis, that's
about 1.6 million tons per year.
That's the equivalent of 350,000
cars being taken off the road.
MILES O'BRIEN: While it may
be the world's largest carbon
capture facility, it is still
only removing about 10 percent
of the CO2 created by the
four coal-fired generators
here.
The only obstacle to
capturing more is money.
DAVID GREESON: We're just now
reaching the point where this
technology is mature enough
to be considered for rollout
to the broad coal-fired fleet
in the United States and
around the world.
MILES O'BRIEN:
Here's how it works.
Flue gas, with carbon dioxide
in it, flows through a duct to
the carbon capture facility.
One vessel contains
amine, an ammonia-based
chemical in liquid form.
It naturally binds
with carbon dioxide.
With the carbon now in solution,
the liquid goes to another
vessel, where it is heated
up.
As that happens, the
process is reversed and
the CO2 pops out as a gas.
It is captured, and, after
it is compressed, ready
for underground storage.
MICHAEL WEBBERMD-B,
University of Texas at Austin:
I think Petra Nova is a shining
example of what technology
offers, and so, as an engineer,
I'm very enthusiastic about
it.
I think it's very exciting.
MILES O'BRIEN: Michael Webber
is deputy director of the Energy
Institute at the University
of Texas at Austin.
He says the energy
sector is watching this
project very closely.
MICHAEL WEBBER: We're getting a
lot of scrutiny because people
want to know if carbon capture
and sequestration will work.
And there are examples around
the nation, around the world
where it hasn't really quite
come together the
way people want.
It's really expensive and hard
to do, so you wouldn't do it
unless you had to, or it's
in your economic favor to do so.
MILES O'BRIEN: And a
coincidence of geography
has made that possible here.
The CO2 from the Petra Nova
facility is sent 80 miles to
the southwest, to the West Ranch
oil field.
Here, the gas is as good as
gold, black gold, Texas tea.
JILL FISK, Senior Vice
President, Hilcorp: That
was the hope, if you
marry up a partnership
between a CO2 emitter where
they can capture the CO2 and
reduce their CO2 emissions, but
then that CO2 can be used
to increase oil production.
That's really a win-win.
MILES O'BRIEN: Jill Fisk is
a senior vice president for
Hilcorp, the current operator
of this oil field, which
first opened in the 1930s.
At its peak in the
'70s, it produced 50,000
barrels of oil a day.
Today, it's down to less
than 300 barrels a day.
Normally, it would be time
to cap the wells here.
But, instead, they're drilling
new ones, getting ready to pump
a lot more oil by injecting
carbon dioxide deep underground.
Liquid CO2 has been used to
liberate the most stubborn
oil for about 40 years.
JILL FISK: Essentially, what's
happening is the oil is stuck
to rock, if you can imagine
that.
The CO2 is injected,
it dissolves into that
oil that's stuck to the
rock, loosens up the
oil, lightens it up, which --
so it can then flow toward a
producer and produce additional
oil.
At West Ranch, we're expecting
to recover an additional 60
million barrels of oil that
would otherwise be left in the
ground and be unrecoverable
without a project of this
type.
MILES O'BRIEN: Right now,
with oil prices so low, Petra
Nova is breaking even, but,
over the next decade, they
expect to make a tidy profit
capturing and burying carbon
dioxide.
But doesn't this just transfer
greenhouse gas emissions
from a power plant smokestack
to automobile tailpipes?
JILL FISK: So, I think that
demand for oil is either going
to be met by foreign oil that
the United States has
to purchase or by our
own production that
we're able to supply.
So this project is breathing
new life into a field in the
U.S. to help supply that demand
for oil.
MILES O'BRIEN: But how
can we be certain buried
CO2 will stay underground?
Scientists from the University
of Texas are running tests at
22 monitoring wells at West
Ranch, getting baseline data
so they will know later if
the injected CO2 triggers some
unintended consequences, like
earthquakes or the release
of deep dwelling salt water,
minerals, or chemicals.
At this test site in Austin,
they are finding new ways
to monitor the buried CO2.
SUE HOVORKA, University of Texas
at Austin: You ready to start?
MILES O'BRIEN: They pump
the gas into groundwater
to simulate leaks.
They use a sensor
that measures light.
It is coated with a polymer that
thins when it reacts with CO2.
If there's any trouble,
the sensor detects more
light, and an alarm is
transmitted automatically.
Geologist Sue Hovorka
leads this effort.
SUE HOVORKA: We need to get
good enough to provide value
to the atmosphere, and we need
to avoid unacceptable
consequences.
MILES O'BRIEN: Hovorka analyzes
deep rock core samples stored
in a cavernous warehouse
at the Bureau of Economic
Geology in Austin.
She says there are ample places
to bury carbon dioxide produced
by all types of fossil fuel
power plants, not
just coal burners.
That would be a
monumental step toward
addressing climate change.
SUE HOVORKA: If consumers want
to use coal and want to reduce
the carbon from that, the
system to do that
is ready to go.
They have to pay for it.
It's not outrageous.
It's totally possible,
but it's not free.
MILES O'BRIEN: Up until now,
clean coal has been nothing
more than a marketing myth.
It could become a reality at
no small cost, but at a small
fraction of the toll if the
industry does nothing
to stop global warming.
In Richmond, Texas, I'm Miles
O'Brien for the "PBS NewsHour."
JUDY WOODRUFF: And as Miles
just said, costs are just one
of the questions about whether
this model could be
replicated more widely.
And Miles joins me
now from Boston.
So, Miles, tell us more
about why -- and so this is
the first plant of its kind.
What are the challenges
in trying to replicate
this somewhere else and
getting the same results?
MILES O'BRIEN: Well,
Judy, the secret sauce
of this one, according
to the innovators behind
it, is, they reduced the cost
of creating the carbon capture.
When I say cost,
the cost in power.
Normally, what the assumption
is, that it reduces the output
of any given power plant
by as much as 30 percent
in order to run the
carbon capture system.
What they did in this case was
they decided not to use the
actual turbines which light
the lights that I'm using
right now, but rather a
separate co-generation
plant air, a smaller
power plant on site that can
be run much more efficiently.
And they say that they -- it's
costing them about 15 percent
of the power-generating capacity
of that plant.
So that's a big hurdle
that they have gotten over.
Now, 15 percent is still a
big number, and unless you
have some commodity or the CO2
has some value, the business
model doesn't add up just yet.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you were
telling us, Miles, there are
also some physical challenges as
well.
MILES O'BRIEN: Well, being 80
miles near an old oil field that
could use that CO2 to capture
and recover a lot of
stubborn oil from the
ground makes it all work.
The question is, could a
fossil fuel plant of any kind
that's a long way away from an
oil field, could it avail itself
of this kind of transaction?
And CO2 can be pumped in
pipelines for an indefinite
amount of distance, as long as
you recompress every now
and then, sort of have
a booster system in.
But, again, that's going
to be a significant cost.
It is not an insurmountable
thing technologically,
and it could be done.
We already have significant CO2
pipelines in the oil sector.
You could extend it out, if
you were determined to do this.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, just
quickly, you were also saying
other practical limits.
MILES O'BRIEN: Well, yes.
It's -- the limits on this are
-- there are some concerns,
for example, about putting
CO2 in seismically active
places, for example.
You wouldn't want to put
buried CO2 underneath San
Francisco, for example.
But, having said all that, when
you consider all the places
that it can be stored, the
experts tell me, we have enough
storage capacity underneath the
continental United States to
last about 900 years
of CO2 production.
So, it's just a question of
societal priorities and whether
we want to pay a little more for
power to get the
carbon dioxide out.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Miles
O'Brien, thanks very much.
MILES O'BRIEN:
You're welcome, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now: a new
national voice for poetry.
In a tradition dating back to
1937, the Library of Congress
selects a prominent writer to
serve as the country's poet
laureate for terms that have
ranged from one to three years.
The goal, according to
the library, to raise the
national consciousness
to a greater appreciation
of the reading and
writing of poetry.
The new laureate was revealed
today, and our Jeffrey Brown
had a chance to talk with her
earlier this week.
JEFFREY BROWN: Empathy and
self-awareness through language,
that is the creed that comes
through in talking with 45 year
old Tracy K. Smith, writer,
teacher, spouse and mother
of three, including 4-year-old
twins, and now taking on a very
public role as the nation's
poet laureate.
TRACY K. SMITH,MD-B U.S.
Poet Laureate: This is a
position that allows me to kind
of profess publicly all that
I really hold true privately,
that, if we can listen actively
enough, if we can put
enough pressure on
ourselves and our thought
process, language can be a
real tool of revelation.
I love being able to do
that with my students
and my little seminars.
And I love the idea that maybe
there's a way that this position
allows me to do that with
my fellow Americans.
JEFFREY BROWN: Smith is
author of three books
of poetry, including the
Pulitzer Prize-winning
"Life on Mars," in part an elegy
for her father, who served in
the Air Force before leaving
to work on the Hubble telescope.
In her 2015 memoir titled
"Ordinary Light," she
writes of growing up in
a tight-knit middle-class
family in Northern California,
a coming-of-age tale exploring
love and loss, race and faith,
a theme that
suffuses her poetry.
TRACY K. SMITH: I wasn't even
aware that that's what I was
doing until after my last book
of poems came out, and
I realized, wow, there's
a -- these poems are
thinking about space,
but they're also searching
for God, in a way.
And I think it comes back to
that sense that I grew up with
that there is something large
that we can cleave
to, if we choose to.
I wanted to figure out if
there was a way that the artist
in me and the 21st century
academic in me could
find something like a
plausible version of God
or a plausible version
of the afterlife that I would
be willing to claim publicly.
And I think that language
facilitated that.
JEFFREY BROWN: Another
big area that you're
often exploring is race.
And, in your memoir,
you talk explicitly
about sort of comparing
your upbringing to your
parents and your grandparents,
the differences there, but
also things that have remained.
TRACY K. SMITH: A lot
of my awareness of how
race had imprinted by
my parents, who grew
up in the segregated South,
a lot of that was shaped by a
sense of sadness and a sense
of anxiety on my part that made
me not want to talk about it.
So, there were a lot of silences
that I was drawn to explore
in writing about that time
that I had never felt capable
of bringing into speech
when I was growing up.
As I get older, I realize the
history that felt so ancient
when I was growing up is so
- - so close to us and present
in ways that I had never
imagined, or didn't want to let
myself imagine
when I was a child.
So, writing about it, I think,
is a way of reckoning with
what is yet to be resolved
about the present moment, about
how we are willing to love
each other, even though we
look different from one another.
JEFFREY BROWN: Smith has
been a professor at Princeton
since 2005 and now heads its
creative writing program,
teaching small seminars to
young poets in the making.
Here especially, she
says, the emphasis is
on how we use language.
TRACY K. SMITH: Yes, this
is our library and one of
our favorite classrooms.
I want them to start thinking
that a poem isn't just an
expression of all these things
that you're feeling, but
it's a set of choices that
you're making in language.
So, every description, every
question, every statement, every
turn is a choice that opens
up or closes off
certain possibilities.
And you don't always think
about that when you're sitting
down to write in the flush
of emotion.
But thinking about...
JEFFREY BROWN: I mean, the
feelings are part of it, right?
TRACY K. SMITH: The
feelings are part of it.
JEFFREY BROWN: And the
expression is part of it.
But you're saying the
language choices...
TRACY K. SMITH: Beyond
that, yes, the language
can help you get some
traction in those feelings.
"One of the women greeted me.
'I love you,' she said.
She didn't know me, but I
believed her, and a terrible new
ache rolled over in my chest."
JEFFREY BROWN: To hear some of
her language, Smith read part
of a new poem titled "Wade
in the Water."
TRACY K. SMITH: "I love you
throughout the performance in
every hand clap, every stomp.
I love you in the rusted iron
chains someone was made to drag
until love let them be unclasped
and left empty in the
center of the ring."
JEFFREY BROWN: Now Tracy K.
Smith will have a prominent
voice, a very public national
platform, to reach
new audiences.
If you think about the
tumultuous times we're
in technologically, all
kinds of changes around
us, if you think about
the divisions politically
at this moment, it seems
like an appropriate
moment to say, why poetry?
Why bother?
Why bother being a poet?
What kind of impact could you
possibly have, amidst all that?
TRACY K. SMITH: Mm-hmm.
I will say that a poem
allows or requires you to
submit to something else.
Often...
JEFFREY BROWN: Submit means?
TRACY K. SMITH: That's one of
the things we don't want to
do, to say, OK, I'm not the
expert.
You're the expert.
Let me listen.
Let me respond to
something that's completely
counterintuitive for
me, that pulls me toward
a different sense
of what's valuable.
I think, when we do that with
a work of art, we're learning
how to do that in real time
with other people.
JEFFREY BROWN: Does that mean
even making us better citizens?
TRACY K. SMITH: I think so.
Poems remind us of that.
Poems remind us that someone
is saying, come here.
This has happened to me.
This is how it made me feel.
This is who I am in
the wake of this thing.
And we all have
stories like that.
And they're important to honor,
and they're important also
to say, maybe my story helps
me listen and cherish this
other person's story, too.
JEFFREY BROWN: Smith says a key
goal for her as laureate will
be to bring poetry into places
where it's not often heard.
For the "PBS NewsHour,"
I'm Jeffrey Brown in
Princeton, New Jersey.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, online,
you can watch Tracy K.
Smith read two new poems.
That's on our Web site
at PBS.org/NewsHour.
And some late-breaking news
before we leave you tonight.
There is word that the
special counsel for the Russia
investigation, Robert Mueller,
is expanding his investigation
to consider whether President
Trump may have committed
obstruction of justice.
That is according to
The Washington Post,
citing unnamed officials.
The report says the obstruction
of justice probe began days
after the firing of FBI Director
James Comey.
In response to the Post
story tonight, a spokesman
for the president's legal
team said in a statement
- - and I quote -- "The
FBI leak of information
regarding the president is
outrageous, inexcusable,
and illegal."
And that is the
"NewsHour" for tonight.
On Thursday, our Making
Sense team takes a look
at a government foreign
investment program
that's under the
microscope because of
its results and potential
use by the Trump family.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again
right here tomorrow evening.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank you,
and we will see you soon.